---
title: Don't create a Password
draft: false
search:
  exclude: false
date:
  created: 2025-08-19T08:33:12
  updated: 2025-08-22T09:30:55
authors:
  - thekaushikls
tags:
  - Computer
  - Internet
  - Security
categories:
  - Citizen Science
  - Technology
comments: true
pin: true
---
THE FIRST STEP IN DIGITAL SAFETY
<!-- more -->

# Don't Create a Password
In today's world where each of us can have thousands online accounts, remembering all the usernames and passwords is no simple feat. Sometimes it is possible to link to an existing Google *(Sign in with Google)* or Microsoft account. But let's face it, not all websites are created same. There are times we have to manually setup passwords for government portals, banks, and other **sites that handle sensitive data**.

## We All Have Our Secrets
The simplest *hack* most of us use is to have one **ultra-secure + easy-to-remember password** that can be used for all places. But you don't want forget this password, and you don't trust your memory (isn't that why we use the same password everywhere?). You'd write it down on a notebook, your notes app, or even in your personal chat window. 

Storing it somewhere to reduce chances of forgetting is a good strategy. But how secure is your password? Is a notebook really the best place? Our **names, phone numbers, birthday dates, anniversary dates,** and combinations of these **are the most commonly used (and easily stolen) passwords**. We probably share the same name with someone, or the same birthday. A million people are going the have the exact same last 4 digits of your phone number **&mdash; don't use that as your ATM pin**. 

## And They Had Mine...
 I thought I was smart to change `e` to `3` and spell `qwerty` as `qw3rty`. I even added a few totally random numbers (like 123) to make it harder to crack it. Only I knew it, and it was easy to type for me. It was the perfect password &mdash; totally secure.
 
 Turns out, **millions of people have come up with the exact same** deadly combination. It had been breached & exposed several times. I was basically handing over my Yahoo, Facebook, and Miniclip (most important of all) account on a silver platter. **I was using the same password everywhere.**

I had forgotten that almost everyone uses a QWERTY keyboard.

## Don't Create. Generate.
I stopped creating passwords. I **generate them**. There are applications that help **create strong passwords**, that automatically **check if your password has been previously exposed**, or even **generate a completely random one** for you. Most of them allow you to set the length, include / exclude numbers, special characters, and capitalization &mdash; to suit various requirements.

Personally, I have used <a href="https://www.avast.com/en-in/random-password-generator" target="_blank">:simple-avast: Avast Random Password Generator :octicons-link-external-16:</a> for years to generate passwords and my *browser's default password manager* to store them. 

## The Second Problem
Having a great passwords is only half the solution. We still need to **store them somewhere safe**. Trying to remember passwords like `CVTINdJmfxisAQbT3rAOijv5EM8uIxC4NNpir4S6` for every login is not a great strategy either. This is where **using a good password manager** helps. Your browser has one, Google has one, even your Mac has Keychain and Windows has Credential Manager by default.

There is a reason why banks encourage using MFA (Multi-factor Authorization) via OTP (One-time Passwords), or ask to **change passwords on a regular basis**. Spending an hour or so every two months to refresh important (if not all) login credentials goes a long way.

## My Current Setup
Avast + Browser does the job for most people. In my case, I also wanted a way to **separate personal passwords from work-related credentials**. I started using <a href="https://bitwarden.com/download/" target="_blank">:simple-bitwarden: Bitwarden :octicons-link-external-16:</a> and never looked back. Admittedly, the initial setup is a bit of work. But the pros outweigh it.

:material-check-circle: One place to access all credentials.
<br>:material-check-circle: Generate strong passwords.
<br>:material-check-circle: Instantly check for exposure.
<br>:material-check-circle: Store anything &mdash; Passwords, SSH Keys, Notes.
<br>:material-check-circle: Organize Personal / Home / Work into folders.
<br>:material-check-circle: Sync between any browser / device seamlessly.
<br>:material-check-circle: Avoid Copy-Paste when sharing credentials.
<br>:material-check-circle: Bonus, it can be self-hosted in my computers.

## Conclusion
Now of course Bitwarden is not the only password manager out there. Which ever you choose to use, make sure the features help you develop good habits and a great system. **Don't store them on Google Keep, or your WhatsApp chat**. These tools are regularly tested by cybersecurity experts &mdash; people who do this for a living.

> You fall to the level of your systems. *&mdash; James Clear, Atomic Habits*

And that's perfectly alright. Let's make sure there is a good system in place. Stay safe.

<center>. . .</center>
